# Orthopedic-pathology-using-Amazon-Sagemaker

Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) are gaining momentum in the healthcare industry, especially in healthcare imaging. The Amazon SageMaker approach to ML presents promising potential in the healthcare field. ML is considered a horizontal enabling layer applicable across industries. Within healthcare, this can serve analogous to a radiology or lab report as a key factor towards eventual diagnosis.

This blog post uses the UCI ML Dataset, which describes using ML in Orthopedics to automate the prediction of spinal pathology conditions. This technology presents an opportunity to take steps to minimize the number of visits and/or prescriptions by shortening diagnosis time and instilling rejection option techniques with ML. This will leave the difficult cases to the experts, such as the Orthopedists. Disc Hernia and Spondylolisthesis, the two diagnoses in the datasets, are among the spinal pathologies that can cause musculoskeletal pain disorders. There is opportunity within computer-aided diagnostic systems that use ML techniques to identify and treat patients-at-risk objectively and effectively to minimize opioid prescriptions for pain disorders.

For this blog post, I downloaded these datasets to present an example for predicting if a person has a normal or abnormal Orthopedic or spinal pathology (Hernia or Spondylisthesis) based on characteristics or features of their vertebral column. Preliminary diagnostic tools that take into account these features for these pathologies have high false positive rates. MRIs are used to detect containment of lumbar disc herniation; this technique has a ~33% false positive rate. Diagnostic spinal blocks (injections) carry a false positive rate of 22% to 47%. (Note: This will be used as a baseline when we evaluate the ML model.)
